# Estate

## Introduction 🌄

Traditional serverless functions like AWS Lambda do not natively maintain state between requests, but Estate serverless functions do natively maintain state between requests.

And furthermore, instead of having to create an HTTP/REST API on the backend that the frontend then integrates with, Estate automagically handles all of it for you. From the developer's perspective, everything is just TypeScript objects/functions shared by both the front and backend, and Estate magically does the frontend/backend integration for you.

Estate is lightning fast: most backend requests complete in under _200μs_ (Not including network round-trip).

## Quick Walkthrough (10 minutes ⏱️): Exercise Tracker Demo App

This demo is an example full-stack SaaS app that allows users to track the exercises they do in a shared real-time list. The backend runs in Google Cloud (us-central) and the front-end client (React+Vite) is running in this StackBlitz sandbox.

## Key Takeaways

🤏 Curiously Concise Code, where's the boilerplate?

🍃 Strongly typed data persistence, end-to-end TypeScript shared type system.

⚡️ Easy-mode real-time server-to-client messaging, update all clients in real-time!

👁‍🗨 Data is remotely observable, adding reactive views!

## Setup (2 minutes ⏱️)

1. Login to the default Estate cluster (aka "Sandbox")

```
$ estate login
```

This opens a new browser tab. Click "Continue as Guest" to login anonymously.

2. Initialize the backend service code directory:

```
$ cd service
$ estate init .
```

Enter `exercise-tracker` when it asks for a name.
This makes the service code directory a Service that can be deployed and connected to by clients/front-ends.

3. Deploy the backend service:
```
$ estate deploy .
```
Each time you make changes to your service backend code, you'll need to rerun this command.

- **Inspect:**
- The backend database source code is located in the `service/index.ts` file.
- It's only 115 lines of code, yet is an entire backend for this application.
- **How:**
- An Estate Service is a collection of one or more TypeScript POJO classes that extend Worker, Data, or Message. Workers run stateful code on the backend and can be called via autogenerated client-side proxies. Data elements define your app's data model, contain business logic, and are persisted to the database. Messages provide real-time backend-to-client events.
- With these three types, you can build very powerful backend business logic.

🤏 Curiously concise backend code

4. Generate code to connect to the service in the front-end/client NPM project:

```
$ cd ..
$ estate connect . exercise-tracker
```

Select "pnpm" (press enter) when asked to update node_modules. It will only ask you to do this the first time you make a service connection.
This command must be rerun each time the backend service is deployed.

6. Start Exercise Tracker demo

```
$ npm run dev
```

## Guided Tour (8 minutes ⏱️)

1. In the Exercise Tracker window (👉), click "Add user" and add a user (any name will do).
   - **Inspect:**
   - The username you entered now exists in the Username drop-down box.
   - A new User Data object was created and saved to the database using the username you supplied.
   - **How:** 
   - The React client code passed the username to the backend by calling a server-side, Worker method at `src/pages/create-user.tsx` line 16:
```
10)  const exerciseTracker = estate.getWorker(ExerciseTrackerWorker, "default");
   ...
16)  await exerciseTracker.addUser(username);
```
   - Line 16 makes a transparent backend call to the Estate backend cluster running the service you deployed.
   - In the backend code, the username argument is passed to the worker method at `service/index.ts`:
```
49)  addUser(username: string): User {
         ...
53)      const user = new User(username);
54)      saveData(user);
         ...
     }
```
   - At line 53, a new instance of the User Data object is instanciated, passing the username to the constructor.
   - The following line saves the new user to the database.
   - If the user didn't have a unique username, `saveData` would throw an exception.
   - This is because the User class passes the username from its contructor to `super`, because all Data-derived classes must specify a primary key:
```
18)  export class User extends Data {
19)      constructor(public username: string) {
20)          super(username);
21)      }
22)  }
```
   - Data can have any number of properties of any TypeScript type. Each property will be stored in the database when the object is passed to `saveData`.

🍃 Estate makes strongly typed data persistence easy

2. Click "Open in new Tab" in the top-right (👉).
3. Right-click the new browser tab and click "Duplicate"
4. Detach the tab and arrange the windows, so you can see all of them at the same time.
5. In the Create Exercise form, fill in the fields and click "Create Exercise Log."
   - **Inspect:**
   - Do you see how the new exercise showed up in the other window instantly?
   - The Message class lets you send strongly typed messages/events from Worker backend code to any number of clients, simultanuosly. This is called a Server-Sent-Event, or SSE.
   - **How:**
   - A Message is a POJO that extends `Message`. Any properties you define on the POJO are sent to clients who subscribe to it. The `ExercsieAdded` message is:
```
12)  export class ExerciseAdded extends Message {
13)       constructor(public exercise: Exercise) {
14)           super();
15)       }
16)  }
```
   - Workers send Messages to clients who have subscribed. The client subscribes to recieve all ExerciseAdded messages sent by the worker at `src/pages/exercises-list.tsx`:
```
71)   estate.subscribeMessageAsync(exerciseTracker, ExerciseAdded, onExerciseAdded)
```
   - The `ExerciseTrackerWorker` sends an ExerciseAdded message at `service/index.ts`:
```
76)   addExercise(exercise: Exercise) {
         ...
85)      sendMessage(this, new ExerciseAdded(exercise));
86)   }
```

⚡️ Estate makes it easy to add real-time capabilities

6. From the list of exercises, edit an exercise or delete an exercise.
   - **Inspect:**
   - See how the change shows up in the other windows?
   - **How:**
   - The React client code subscribes to external updates to `Exercise` object changes (including deletes) at `src/pages/exercises-list.tsx`:
```
80)     estate.subscribeUpdatesAsync(exercises_)
81)         .then(() => {
82)             ...
83)             estate.addUpdateListener(exercises_, onExerciseUpdate);
84)         })
```
   - Line 80 tells the Estate back the client wants to recieve updates to the exercise Data instances in the `exercises_` array.
   - Line 83 tells the Estate browser runtime to call the `onExerciseUpdate` client function when new updates are recieved. This lets the client code update the view/UI when other clients make changes.

👁‍🗨 Estate's Data is remotely observable, adding more real-time goodness

# Testers, Needed!

Please check out our GitHub https://github.com/EstateJS/estate
(Stars would be very helpful, thanks!)

We're active on Discord! https://discord.gg/ahHffbBkNQ

# More Learning

The estate repo contains the client-side packages: 
https://github.com/EstateJS/estate

The system repo contains the backend platform:
https://github.com/EstateJS/system

If you're interested in how the transport protocol works, check out the Google Flatbuffers schemas:
https://github.com/EstateJS/system/tree/main/schema

## Open-Source License
The framework (Tools SDK, Client runtime) is MIT licensed and the platform is Apache-2 licensed.
